There are three main reasons houses
burn down during fres. They are:
⊲ Embers
⊲ Heat
⊲ Flame
Embers
Embers are burning pieces of bark, leaves and twigs.
They are carried by wind and can start spot fres. They
are the most common way houses catch fre. For hours
before a fre reaches a home and after it has passed,
embers land on and around it.
Embers start fres when they land in gaps in the roof,
chimneys, underfoor and through broken windows.
Anywhere burning leaves or twigs enter your home,
or get wedged, there is a risk they will start a fre. If
embers get inside your home, fre will quickly spread
because there are so many fammable objects inside
such as curtains and carpet.
Heat
The heat from fres is intense, (think of how hot a
campfre is). When fammable materials get hot enough,
they can catch alight without any fame. Heat can also
cause glass to break. Woodpiles, outdoor furniture and
plants that are near or against your home can ignite
and expose it to heat that is hot enough and sustained
enough to cause fres and damage.
Flame
Fires typically destroy everything in their path. If you
live in a high fre-risk area, it may be impossible to
prevent. What you can do is design your property so
that you reduce the intensity of the fre when it reaches
your home. You can do this by designing your garden
to reduce heat and fames reaching your house, by
creating frebreaks with gravel or dirt, and keeping
plants and trees maintained. By preparing properly, you
give your house the best chance to survive fre, even if
you plan to leave early

Even if you plan to leave early, you can
do a lot to protect your home from fre.
There are a couple of basic rules:
⊲ Reduce the risk of fre getting inside your house
⊲ Reduce the fame and heat near your house.
To reduce the risk of fre getting inside your house, you
need to seal cracks and reduce weaknesses such as
glass that can break during a fre.
Some preparations are costly and not achievable for
everyone. If you can’t aford protections such as fre-
resistant shutters, there are still many things you can
do to protect your home. Some are as simple as cutting
back shrubs from your windows, or removing outdoor
furniture and woodpiles from near your house.
Fire days are usually windy days. Most people who’ve
experienced bushfre say there were more and larger
embers than they expected. When you prepare, think
about what might be a risk in these conditions.
You can do a lot to reduce the fame and heat near
your house by designing a garden that is fre wise
and maintaining it during warmer months. Fire burns
wherever there is fuel. If you reduce fuel around your
home, you can reduce how hot and destructive a fre is
as it passes through your property.
Well-placed garden beds, frebreaks and reducing
vegetation under trees are all ways you can manage
fre risk.